getfattr
========
- get extended attributes of files/directories.

- For each file, getfattr displays the file name, and the set of extended
  attribute names (and optionally values) which are associated with that file.

get xattr
---------
::

  getfattr -n name pathname...

- dump the value of the named xattr with its name.

dump all xattr
--------------
::

  getfattr -d [-m pattern] pathname...


options
-------
- ``-e en``, ``--encoding=en``. Encode  values  after  retrieving  them.
  Valid  values  of en are "text", "hex", and "base64".  Values encoded as text
  strings are enclosed in double quotes ("), while  strings  encoded  as
  hexidecimal  and base64 are prefixed with 0x and 0s, respectively.

- ``-m pattern``, ``--match=pattern``. Only include attributes with names
  matching the regular expression pattern. The default value for  pattern  is
  "^user\\.", which includes all the attributes in the user namespace. Specify
  "-" for including all attributes.

- ``--absolute-names``.

- ``--only-values``. Dump out the raw extended attribute value(s) without
  encoding them.

- ``-R``, ``--recursive``. List the attributes of all files and directories
  recursively.

- ``-L``, ``--logical`` Logical  walk,  follow  symbolic links to directories.
  The default behaviour is to follow symbolic link arguments unless
  --no-dereference is given, and to skip symbolic links  encountered in
  subdirectories.

- ``-P``, ``--physical`` Physical  walk,  do  not follow symbolic links to
  directories.  This also skips symbolic link arguments.

setfattr
========
- set extended attributes of files/directories.

set xattr
---------
::

  setfattr -n name [-v value] pathname...

- set xattr ``name`` of ``pathname`` to ``value``.

- name must be namespace-prefixed.

- value can be empty.

remove xattr
------------
::

  setfattr -x name pathname...

restore xattrs
--------------
::

  setfattr --restore=file

- The file must be in the format generated by the  getfattr  command  with the
  --dump  option.   If a dash (-) is given as the file name, setfattr reads
  from standard input.

options
-------
- ``--raw``. Do not decode the attribute value.

references
==========
- setfattr(1)

- getfattr(1)
